Hello, today is April 21st in the year 2023. I'm Karen Herman and I am delighted to be interviewing Deb Goodkin for the Free and Open Source Stories Digital Archive. So welcome and thank you so much for doing this. I'm very excited to be doing this with you today. And we're going to start right from the beginning, which is when and where were you born?

Oh, well, I was born in Hollywood, California. And I was born in 1961. And where did you grow up? So I grew up in Southern California. And so half my childhood was in Los Angeles. And then we moved to San Diego, which was great. And, and lived there until I graduated from college.

What did your parents do?

So my dad, it was always really hard to understand what he did. None of us kids really interested in it, not like he was in the CIA or anything. But he, he basically was in real estate, but helping large developers develop, like larger communities. And so he did that, as long as I knew, and was like, sort of known as an expert in that. And I worked for him when I was in high school, when I was in college, and he actually thought I would take over the business from him. And my mom worked until she had kids. And she wanted to be a doctor, and she would have been a great doctor, but she was a bacteriologist. And a lot of it was just because of the times.

And do you have any brothers or sisters? I have two older brothers. And do you have any brothers or So I have two older brothers. And what kind of kid were you? Um, Um, I guess if I think about that, I, um, I don't know if it was because I had brothers, but I was

very outdoorsy. And I always remember us kids just playing outside all the time. And I think growing up in Southern outside all the time. And I think growing up in Southern California, I mean, the weather was always beautiful. And so you could do that. And we had a swimming pool beautiful. And so you could do that. And we had a swimming pool at home. And so we in the summers, we swam. And I always remember my oldest brother was into filming. So he had this old camera, and then he would set us up, we would do like war scenes, all us up, we would do like war scenes, all sorts of things that we would play together. And we would play a lot of together. And so I think as a kid, I would have been referred to as a tomboy. But really, I mean, to me, that's just like being a kid, just being, you know, curious and active. And, and because when one of my brothers was much older than me, he would take me backpacking and river rafting and things like that. So, so it was a good childhood.

Did you have any idea what you wanted to be when you grew up?

I want there are a lot of things I wanted to be. And I think that's what made it hard. And, and my parents, they never encouraged me to be anything, but they never limited it. So they never made me feel like there was anything I couldn't do. So I mean, I went from wanting to be an astronaut to a veterinarian to, you know, I thought about being a doctor. So, so, you know, so, so it was nice being able to think about it or knowing I had those options. And but, but it took time narrowing down, you know, where, where I thought I should go.

Did, did you have any interest in computing or computers as a kid?

So, um, we didn't have a computer when I was growing up. So that was before home computers. And so I really, the only thing I knew about computers was really the word processors, which were fancy typewriters. And because my dad was also a writer, we had one at home. And so that was pretty novel. And but, but I didn't grow up with computers. So I didn't know anything, I really didn't know anything about them. And, and so it really wasn't until I went to college that I was exposed to computers. So really, before that, I mean, part of my growing up, and maybe because I had I had brothers too, I built a lot of things, I was really into, like building models, and we would build like, model cars and model airplanes and things like that. So I've always enjoyed that building things.

And where did you go to college?

I went to University of California in San Diego, and for my undergrad, and then I went to University of Santa Clara, up in Santa Clara, California. And what did you study? So for my undergrad, it was computer engineering, which was, at that time, it was part computer science and part electrical engineering. And then for my master's degree, I got a master's in electrical engineering.

It's interesting, because you said that you really didn't have, you didn't know anything about computers till you got to college. How did you then decide to major in it?

Yeah, I mean, that's a really good question. Because when I started college, actually, I was focused more on business, because like I said, before, the plan was really for me to take over my dad's business. But it wasn't something I was really interested in. And my mom actually helped me try to figure out what I was good at. And I grew up thinking, never thinking I was good at math, but my mom would always tell me how she was good at math. I don't even know why it would come up. But I knew that I knew my mom was good at math. And so I realized that I was also very good at math. And so in doing like an assessment test at that time, computer science, and engineering actually came up as a strength. And I thought, you know what, I, this would be a great major, because I could get a job. And so that was really why I went in that direction. direction.

And was there something specific that you studied? Um, Um, well, actually, I was really, so in the computer engineering, you get a lot of, you know, computer science theory, and

like understanding algorithms, and you learn a lot of different programming languages from, we actually started with punch cards, just to check them out. So I mean, at that time, you had Pascal and Fortran and BASIC. And we did, we wrote an assembly language, we wrote compilers, so a lot of software development, and as well as understanding theory, but also electrical engineering side, so circuits and in all in the typical types of classes that you would get in electrical engineering, I took math all four years, just because, as an elective, just because I was good at it. And, and so I made sure I always took a math class.

And so then you went to graduate school. Again, was there was there something that you wanted to do specifically, at that point?

So, so I didn't plan to go to grad school after I graduated. When I joined IBM, it was a time when they actually were hiring a lot of new college graduates. And so, so when I started IBM, and we had, I don't know how many, maybe there's 10, eight or 10 of us that were all new, and, and IBM offered to pay for your tuition to go to grad school. So we all considered doing it. And the choice really was between Stanford and University of Santa Clara, because both universities were right there. And I actually chose University of Santa Clara, because they had a new storage focus. So it was the first time any university that I knew of was actually teaching about storage devices and that type of technology, which made sense, because IBM, so I worked for IBM, that's what what we did there. And, and so and actually, Santa Clara Valley was growing into sort of a storage focused area. So, so that was my focus, even though it was electrical engineering. And, and it was really just, you know, to have that degree under my belt, and the fact that IBM paid for it. And actually, you could finish your last quarter semester as a full time student, and you still get got your salary at the time. So it was a pretty good deal. Well, and where were the offices at IBM? They're in South San Jose. And that campus is gone. When I go there, I don't, I don't even recognize anything anymore. It was a large campus, though. And you were working with storage? I was working storage. Yeah, I, so it's not like now where you have a disk drive on your desk, and you actually see it. They were in big cabinets in on the, in the computer rooms, and in those air conditioned rooms. And so rarely would I actually go and look at it. But so I worked on a, you know, a small component of, of the storage device. And I also, so I did some firmware, or we called it microcode there, and, and also went into hardware development, doing logic design. And so, so I focused on the ECC, the error correct, error correction code. And, and that was a really nice opportunity, because one of the main architects of ECC, of the ECC there at IBM was working in our group, and I got to work under, under him. And so I learned a lot. So it was a great opportunity.

What year was that? Oh, I don't know. That was, so I joined IBM in 1984. Okay. And I worked for them for like three years, maybe. What was the state of storage at that time? So different? So, um, storage. So I don't know, I don't remember how much you could store on those large storage devices. But, um, I mean, these were storage

devices storage devices for large computers. So companies like, you know, like HP would use, well, they had their own computers. But, you know, basically, you, the the the the customer would have like an IBM 360 computer, which is also a big cabinet. And then they would have the storage that would go with it. When I was at IBM, the first PCs were coming out. And so, so we actually got those to use for development. And the first PC had a floppy drive, I don't think we had any hard storage on it. But I always remember getting my first disk drive that was five megabytes, which is nothing now. It was so much and then it doubled to we went to 10 megabytes. But, but it was so cool to be able to have your own computer with your own storage that you could save your own files to. And so the the disk drives we worked on at IBM, those were 14 inch platters or just, you know, just size. just size. And, and so once you had the personal computer, those were five and a quarter. So typically, if you see a disk drive, then it's it's usually like the older ones are five and a quarter. I don't know your know, if you can get those anymore. Nowadays, if you're still getting, you know, rotational disk, then it's it's three and a half or two, two and a half. So, you know, so they just kept getting smaller. And, and larger storage, as you know, now, they're in the terabytes. How are we there at IBM? I think I was there for three years. So, so it wasn't, it wasn't real long. And at that time, you when you joined IBM, you're a lifer, you people didn't leave IBM. And I mean, and they took care of you. And so there was really no reason to leave. But it's also when Silicon Valley was just coming alive. And, and so when you work for IBM, you were paid the same. It didn't matter where you, you lived in San Jose and the whole Bay Area was a pretty expensive place to live. And, and so I thought I could do better financially. Another company was one of the other startups. And there were quite a few storage companies starting out in that area. And so I went, that's when I, I left IBM. And really, that was the time others started leaving IBM too. So, so I think it was just how things were, you know, changing at the time with, with, you know, the emergence of this whole Silicon Valley.

What did you, what was the thing that you learned the most about at IBM? At IBM, at IBM? At IBM, it gave me a really good foundation on how to develop code. And so you didn't really have like a hacking mentality then, like you have now.

And, now. And, and, and that's fine, too. It's just that you really had to think through, what are you trying to do? And then how are you going to do that? And then, And then, as like a junior level engineer, I would actually, so I'd have to come up with my plan or my design. And then you actually had a design that you hand wrote. So it wasn't a programming language yet. And, and so we actually refer to it as pseudocode. And then you would actually meet with others, your colleagues, and, and people would review your design. And so you wouldn't actually implement it until it got approved. So, so it was a great way to learn because if someone saw like a hole in that, or even a, you know, a better way to do something, you would learn from that. And so taking that time to think through, you know, what, really, what are you trying to achieve? And then how can you get there? I, that was a good skill to have, and philosophy to have. Also working with others to learn how to collaborate with others. I mean, you learn that in school, but, but now, you know, you have a real product. And, and the way IBM worked back then, too, is sometimes you had competing teams. And so they had the money to fund, like, similar teams, you didn't always know it. And, and so whoever came out with better product, you know, basically won. You didn't look at it like that, basically, they would cancel your product, project, and you'd move on to something else. So, because things were so new, back then, too. So you didn't, there was so much possibility for innovation. And so I think that philosophy, that IBM was able to do that, was great. I also learned a lot from my manager, who happened to be a female, and her background was electrical engineering, too. And she was such a good role model for me, as well as a lot of the other people there. So, so it was a great experience starting out.

Were there a lot of other women that you were working with at the time? Did you? So, there were real, I mean, I would say it was 50-50. But that group of people that they hired, the group of college students that they had hired

when I joined, I almost want to say it was half and half of, of women and men. And, which was really cool, because it made it so, it made it just normal. And we were all, everyone was really sharp, and came from different backgrounds in different schools. And, but we're all young, and we came from college. And so we still wanted to enjoy ourselves. And so we actually formed great relationships with each other, too, where we would, you know, we'd go out on Friday nights together, go dancing and, and stuff. So it was really, it was a great friendship that we all had. And then, and which, it didn't carry over to the other companies I worked at. So, so it was a really interesting opportunity. And in, you know, going forward, I don't know if that's something that IBM continued to do. But it was just happened to be the timing when I joined that they were just hiring a bunch of new people.

Where did you go after IBM?

I went to Mac Store. And so they're a disk drive company, they were doing the five and a quarter inch drives. And so I didn't do any firmware for them, I actually joined as the applications engineer. And so what that meant was that, so you have the product, and it could have been in development, most time it was in development. And but I worked with the customers who wanted to use assist drives. And so most of the time, either I would have those systems of those companies, or I would actually go on site and, and basically make sure that it worked in their applications. And then if it didn't, debugging and, and figuring out or, you know, working with the engineering team, what, you know, is it on our side? Is it on the customer side? Do they need to make changes? And, and so it was really interesting, because I got to work with Sun Microsystems, DAC, HP, NeXT computer, which isn't around anymore, but that's like where Wasnik went after Apple. So that so working with NeXT was pretty exciting at that time, because they're pretty cool.

And you were early in Silicon Valley, that's really when things are totally booming. What was that like? It was just starting? Yeah, it was just I mean, it's funny, because I mean, tech, tech was there. But it wasn't like the big boom, which was happening, I think

that was more in the 90s. But yeah, you had, you had Apple, and like I said, NeXT. And so you had these really innovative companies that were just starting out and growing. I mean, HP had been around for a while, DAC, same thing, but still working with some some of these, you know, longtime companies like DAC versus like, NeXT that came out with this black computer. Yeah, no one had done that before. It was really cool. It was really innovative. Sun was pretty well known. And, and so and so I got to work with engineers at all those companies. And so, so it was really good exposure, as well as learning, learning opportunities, and seeing how other companies worked. And, and also just really problem solving, trying to figure out why, why something doesn't work.

Was there a lot of secrecy, and, you know, kind of proprietary knowledge and things like that?

So everything was proprietary, but, um, but no, it wasn't like that. Like, so I think of secrecy, I think of like Apple, how, how, I mean, they're still like that. Really successful. That's how they work. So I mean, I came here and think of whether, you know, did we have NDAs? Did I have to worry about that? I actually don't remember that. But all of our stuff, like, so all the code that I wrote, that was all proprietary code. And, you know, and it's, I mean, basically, it was up to us to update that firm, and it was all firmware. And so it resided on the drive. And so it was up to us to update that if there were any problems.

Or do you find that collaborative as well? Or could you call people from other companies or things like that? Well, it's definitely companies or things like that? Well, it's definitely working with the other companies was definitely collaborative, because you wanted, you wanted it to work. So you didn't, so you had to work

together. And there was nothing competitive about that. So, so I remember it as just, you know, friendly, friendly environment, when, oh, and when I would meet with when, oh, and when I would meet with companies, sometimes, especially like if it's somewhere totally different, like I went to Maine. And so the head engineering manager there took me on this little there took me on this little sightseeing tour with his wife, and which was, which was so nice. And I, and I remember in Alabama, going to the Space Center, when I was there, and I can't remember when I was there, and I can't remember the company I was working with. But, but yeah, that's, yeah, you would have, over time, you'd build relationships with people. And so, so that was always fun when, when you had was always fun when, when you had those opportunities, too. And then within the teams, I always remember, whether it was at IBM, or Maxstar, or any other, any of the other jobs, I had that it was always collaborative, jobs, I had that it was always collaborative, you're always working together with other, other folks to create this product or solve a problem. And a problem. And Maxstar, you started to be more management, right? You started to manage people as well.

So Maxstar was started to manage people as well. So Maxstar was the first time, yeah, I had a, I moved into a management job. Yes.

And

So, so Maxstar actually bought Miniscribe, which was based in Colorado. And, and so I want, at the time, I wanted to leave California for various reasons. And I was really

interested reasons. And I was really interested in moving to Colorado. But at the time, they wouldn't transfer any engineers to Miniscribe. And for various reasons. And so, since I had started pursuing that, I thought, well, okay, let me just look around. And so I ended up working for a company called Sirius Logic. And so that was more, that was a chip company. So it was a chip company. That was a chip company. So a chip company. So it was a chip company. That was a chip company. So it was still in storage, but it was at a different level. Well, it was at a lower level. And that I'd been working at before and I stayed in applications engineering, but it was, we were referred to as field application engineers. So you worked directly with a salesperson and you had customers here in this region, and, and you actually went on site. And so typically, you would go to either help them bring something up, or if there was a problem, you would go and help debug it. And so it was sort of, it was more like a technical sales role. So it was, it was really interesting to see that. You know, it's just sales is so different than just engineering. And it got you to Colorado. It got me to Colorado. Yep. So it got me what I wanted. It was a good, it was a good company. I have to say all the companies I worked for. They're great. And yeah, great experiences. Yeah, not I mean, it's not wasn't perfect. But, but yeah, they're good. So there I didn't, I didn't last. I maybe I worked for them for a year. I can't remember. It wasn't, it wasn't long term. I actually went from there and I went to work for Connor peripherals, which is was bought by Seagate eventually after I left. And so Connor peripherals was founded by these two guys. And one of the guys actually was based. Well, actually, was based. Well, actually, I think they both were based out here. But one still was in charge of this facility and development center. And he was still a developer. And, and so I went back into firmware. And, and so and I worked on SCSI devices, just different computer interface. And, and so I had the opportunity to work with him, which was so cool. And, you so cool. And, you know, and back then, and maybe this is also different than, like working on a software project is that you have a smaller code set. And so you don't need a large group of people to work on it. So I basically own all the code that from the computer interface to the disk drive, to where you send the, the data off to the read, write logic. And And hardware.

How is that different from what came before? Was it was it completely? Was it the only way to make that happen?

Yeah, you mean, in general, on a distress? Or? Yeah, it was just a larger. Well, so like at IBM, you have a lot more circuitry. So, so when I wrote firmware there, I was just writing, I wrote the firmware that just basically wrote the data to the E squared prom. And so it's a really small, small component of this drive. Whereas at Connor, I was so you have a disk drive disk drive talks to your computer. So you have your operating system, your host, and then it has you have your file, you want to write your file, you want to save it to the desk. So, so your operating system would send that file to the disk drive disk drive. So you have that interface. And that's the part that I would control. And so and I would take the so you communicate, you talk back and forth, take the data. So data is what you want to protect. So you don't want anything corrupted. And so and then you, you do whatever you need to do with it in the disk drive, and then the read write code takes it and actually writes it to, to the media, which is a lot more complicated.

And you were at how long were you a con?

I was at Connor for I can't remember, five years, I'd have to, I'd have to look back at, but you know, it was basically so caught. So Connor was, um, I think it was sort of the changing point in my career where, um, you know, I didn't quite like the nine to five type of life and having to be in meetings a lot and also judged on how many hours are you there actually at the office. And, um, and so I knew people who did what I did, but as consultants or contractors. And And that's when I decided, I like the idea of being more flexible. And my skill was needed and desired. And there weren't a lot of people who wrote firmware. And so I took that chance of leaving and, and I had a contract when I left and, and I just contracted for years. And, and it was great because I felt like if people like the work I was doing, they would hire me and they would pay me. And I didn't have to spend a lot of time, um, in meetings. It didn't matter what my hours were during the day. And because one thing I really like to do, and I still do this is I like to start really early. And then I like to take one to two hours off, um, before lunch to go work out. And I love having that flexibility. And so, um, so it was, it was good. And I had, um, I contracted for Sony and Seagate and, uh, Maxdor and a lot of just different, uh, disk drive companies.

And is that, and were you doing that, um, when you, when you, um, went to the FreeBSD foundation? Was that?

So I, I, um, I wasn't quite doing that much anymore. What I, I have a gap really in my engineering career. Cause, uh, when nine 11 happened, um, it changed, um, well really affected the economy and, and companies and, uh, companies, when they could hire, um, it would be so hard for them to have a open a rack that they wouldn't want it to be full time. And, and what I was always trying to do was work part-time and maybe I would take two contracts, two part-time ones, or even just work part-time and cause I had young kids and that's what I wanted to do at the time. And, um, so I found it really difficult to find work. And so, um, so I, I took some time off. I did, um, jumped in, in and out of a few types of jobs. And then, um, and then I took on the foundation and I did take it on part-time at the beginning too. And it was really because they didn't have probably any money at the time. So I saw it as an opportunity. Okay. Let's, let's, let's, let's, let's, let's actually back up a little bit and talk about that.

How did you first, um, you know, hear about the FreeBSD foundation and how did, how were you connected?

So, um, the FreeBSD foundation, I didn't know anything about. And, um, so, uh, my friend had contacted me and she said, so she was working at this, um, aerospace company here in Boulder. And, And, um, so I'm here in Boulder, Colorado. Um, and she said, I, there's a guy at my company. So she worked at an HR and she said, there's this guy in my company. He's running a nonprofit and he's looking for someone to run it. And I told him that I had a friend who is an engineer and looking for some work. And so anyway, so she connected us and that was the first time I had heard of FreeBSD and the FreeBSD foundation. And so, um, so the guy she was talking about was Justin Gibbs, who's the founder of the FreeBSD foundation. He's here in Boulder and he had started the foundation, I think it was about four or five years before that. And I bet he was working full time. And so it was growing to the point where he really couldn't run it. He, and he saw so much potential for growth that he wanted to find someone to run the company. And so, so he went to my friend, right. For just for advice on, you know, how do I find someone? And, um, and so we met at, had lunch together and decided that I was the right person. And, uh, so, so, you know, it, I, I always feel like I lucked out in the timing and the situation and, um, and it's been, it's been a great opportunity.

What did you know about the free and open source world before you started?

I knew nothing about it, which is just so weird because I mean, when I look at the history and stuff, cause I worked with Unix in the early days. So I knew about that, but, um, but because I was so focused on disk drives and storage and I worked, um, on optical storage, it was very focused what I did. And firmware is, um, it's almost at the hardware level. So you don't even have the bigger picture of software. And, um, and so we, none of the companies I worked at, we never used open source. And, uh, so I didn't have any exposure to it before that. So, uh, so that was all new and, and that's what made it so interesting working for the foundation because, um, I mean, I had the engineering background, but I didn't have operating system background. Um, open source didn't, that part didn't really matter. Um, but I never worked for a nonprofit, let alone run a nonprofit. So, um, so I was stepping into this whole new world and, um, and so it was really a good learning opportunity. I mean, you talk about like every day you have something, maybe not like fun, right? Cause it, maybe you're figuring out like, well, what can we legally do? Or, you know, cause I needed to hire myself and, uh, or employee myself. I was the first employee. And so what does that mean? What kind of, you know, what kind of federal and state laws do you have to follow to have an employee? And, uh, you know, so there's so many little things. And unfortunately the friend that I had at this one company that Justin worked at, um, she actually gave me advice on, cause since she was from HR, uh, she could actually give me a little bit of advice to, to get started. Like here, here's, here are the government sites where you can get this type of information. So, uh, so I was always trying to figure things out. And, um, and then, um, I, my focus was really more on FreeBSD as an operating system and trying to understand that, understanding, um, use cases and big companies. Why are they using FreeBSD and how are they using it? And so understanding that over it being open source. Well, that's a really good question. Uh, because he, so basically he saw that, um, that he thought the engineering side of me would really help, uh, with project management. And so at the time we were really only funding projects and the biggest project was, uh, making sure the Java binaries from Sun, um, worked on FreeBSD. And, uh, so he thought I'd step in and project manage that, which I did. That was my first project. Um, he also thought, I don't know if I should make this on the recording or not, but he, he also thought as a mom that I'd be well organized to run a company. And I mean, little did he know, I really wasn't very organized. So just cause you're a mom, I mean, you're automatically an organized person, but it's, but, um, but maybe it helped me get a job.

Did you, did you have, um, did you have a lot of free reign when you started? I I mean, you basically had to create the whole thing. Yeah.

I mean, he really wanted me to just, you know, please just, you know, let me hand this off to you and just go with it. But he was, he was always available when I had questions and, um, and so, so that's why, I mean, it was a good opportunity because I could do that. And so some of the stuff was just administration, like, oh, let's get a tax exempt, uh, certification. So we don't have to pay sales taxes to just how to, you know, which we do about taxes. And then, um, I, I did all of our accounting and, um, and actually that was one thing that I used to do for my dad too was, um, was accounting. So I had that, that background. Um, and so I did that for, for a really long time for the company until we really grew. And, uh, but yeah, he, he was available to ask questions. We also had a board of directors and they were at the time they were hands on. So, um, so if you needed someone to do like review, uh, a proposal or actually to even write an article for a newsletter, um, then it was always a board member that we do that. Cause it was just me. And then, um, and I was learning from them too. What, um, you know, what was the foundations, you know, what are our longterm goals? What are we really trying to do? And we're really defining that as time went by. Cause initially it was just to fund certain projects and, um, oh, provide travel grants to people to go to conferences. And, um, and so then from there, it's really, um, wasn't so much like, what do we want to do? What does the project need? Cause that's our purpose is to support the project and the community. And so, um, it's a lot of discussions on that, which was, um, which was always interesting. I mean, we still do that.

Talk about, so, so the, the FreeBSD foundation and then there's the FreeBSD, how, how does that work, um, in terms of, you know, how you work together or, or don't?

Yeah, we're two totally different organizations. And And so the FreeBSD project is, uh, made up of volunteers and, uh, from around the world and it's not a legal entity. And entity. And we have the FreeBSD foundation and, uh, which is a legal entity. It's, uh, um, here in the U S we, it's, um, based, uh, when the IRS, um, uh, not certification, but, um, a definition, um, is this that we're a 501 C three. And so there's different types of nonprofits here. And so we're for the public good. And so our whole purpose is to support the project. So if FreeBSD went away, then we would most likely go away because we wouldn't have a purpose anymore. And so there's a lot of foundations out there that are umbrella organizations. And so it means that they have the foundation and then the project or multiple projects are under them. And so when you have it like that, then you have a lot more control of the project and I could tell, basically, uh, direct them and tell, tell them what to do. So the way that we work is that I always, like, if I create an org chart, I would put a side by side and we could step in. And since we're a legal entity, we could actually sign legal documents on behalf of the project. And, uh, but also, uh, when we see that there's needs or the project comes to us with, with needs, um, then we look at, we have funding and, um, and so we might be able to fund a project. Or, um, or we buy equipment for the FreeBSD infrastructure. And so, uh, so basically, uh, we'll provide resources for the project. We also do advocacy. And, um, so we, uh, travel around the world and give talks on FreeBSD. We'll have, uh, tables at conferences and we'll promote FreeBSD. We provide literature and educational material and, um, and things like that. So, so we're always trying to promote FreeBSD and, uh, we also talk to, uh, companies that use FreeBSD as well as potential users and, uh, work on like value propositions and why, why you should use FreeBSD. So we're also, we also act as salespeople for it, even though, you know, I mean, cause FreeBSD is a product, it doesn't cost anything to get it. Um, but we want to get more people using it. So if someone doesn't know what FreeBSD is, how would you describe it?

And, you know, what's sort of your sales pitch for it?

Um, well, usually, I mean, sadly we'll say, have you heard of Yenix? Cause I mean, not Yenix, Linux, uh, cause most people have heard of Linux. And, um, and so we'll say, you know, it's, it's, uh, it's, it's, it's, it's a free computer operating system. It's based off of, uh, Yenix, which is over 50 years old and, uh, came out of development out of, uh, out of Berkeley. And, um, and it's used on, uh, you know, you're, you're probably using FreeBSD right now. Cause if you watch Netflix, all those, um, shows and movies are being streamed off FreeBSD devices. And if you're running, if you have an iPhone, um, iOS and MacOS were all originally developed off of, um, BSD and then FreeBSD from that. And, oh, and the, the Sony PlayStation is also FreeBSD based. So, so once, um, you use examples of those types of companies that are using FreeBSD, then people are like, oh, and so, you know, so it's, it's a nice way to connect, uh, FreeBSD to, uh, what they know or what they're using today. Cause even with Linux is the same thing. It's like, they've heard of it, but are they running Linux on their computers? Yeah, most, most aren't. So, I mean, we all know windows and, um, and you know, MacOS.

And then, and then, and then in terms of the, in terms of the open source piece of it, um, talk about that.

Well, so FreeBSD has a really long history. Like I was saying, it, um, it branched off of the original Unix and, um, and Unix became open source eventually. And, um, it's like the real first unencumbered Unix like operating system actually came out of Berkeley and it was called, uh, 386 BSD. And that was back in the early eighties. And so basically Berkeley took Unix and developed on it. So some of it was for research. Um, well, most of it was for research. They're being funded by the government too, to work on it. And so, you know, the first open source really was, I think like in the early fifties, cause when these large companies like IBM and Amdahl, when they, uh, so they came, they developed these computers. And so when they'd sell a computer, that's where they made their money, not on the operating system or the software. So that they actually provided that too, because also it was to their benefit to have others make it work for them. And then it was more like when windows came out, maybe it wasn't windows cause it was DOS. Um, then you started having, seeing value in selling software and then that's when it became proprietary. And, um, so, so it had changed over time. Right. So when, um, so when like Berkeley Unix and then Linux came out and FreeBSD, um, that was, it was considered, um, you know, competitive to windows back then. Okay. And talk to me. So, so I get, so getting back to like open source, the FreeBSD, um, I mean, we, so we were really one of the first open source projects around. We weren't the first, but we were one first open source projects around. We weren't the first, but we were one of the first, um, and largest and most successful really. And we're still around and we're still growing. So still growing. So it's not like we're still just, you know, I mean, we're still, we're still growing. I mean, we're getting more still, we're still growing. I mean, we're getting more users and, um, you know, more companies using FreeBSD. So, so we have a very long history and, um, and also, and a lot of open source projects can learn from, you know, our government governance model, as well as some of the things that we did in the early days to, to make it successful.

Can you talk about that? What those things that you did in the early days?

So, um, some of them were in, and I wasn't around for these, but, um, um, like they use a software, uh, source control, um, version control, um, back in the early days where when other projects done. Now I did, but he's, I did, that's something that we did. But apparently open source projects did not. And so it's something we still do on most projects. All, all, all of them, most of them will use Git now. Um, so that was one thing, a flat, um, um, a flat development model, meaning that, um, we, if you compare, uh, so a lot of, uh, comparisons happen between FreeBSD and Linux. And Linux, you have, um, Linus Torvalds, who is the one who came up with Linux and is still the head person there, and you have a lieutenant structure. And so when you make a change, it has to go up that hierarchy to get approved and, or reviewed. And within FreeBSD, it's a flat structure. And so you can submit something and someone within the team will review and either approve it or not. Uh, it doesn't mean it has low standards, but it, it does mean it's much easier to get your changes in because of time. You don't have so many people that it has to go through, or even just, even if it was just like a couple of people, it's just people have to be available to, to review. And so, um, so we find like, especially like with companies, um, that they like that because it is easier for them to get their changes in, um, as well as, uh, just contributors that, um, that they don't have to wait so long. And especially if you're new too, that, um, you can get changes in much quicker. So that, so that's a, that's a big thing that started from, um, the early days. Basically, the governance model was developed at Berkeley. And, um, and so they had, if I remember correctly, they had their small team of people who did commit the code, but they had a lot of other contributors outside and they would submit their changes. And then you'd have the Berkeley folks, um, who would actually commit the code to the, the source tree.

Got it. Um, it. Um, talk about, about some of the main projects that, um, this foundation has funded.

Um, so like I mentioned, so early on Java binaries, um, that was big having that support in there. And then, um, and Java binaries moved on to being, uh, open source, the Java code, Java. Um, and so we haven't had to step in for that much. We do a little support there. Um, so, um, some of the projects that we've funded, well, if you look outside of development, so we're always focused on like what software development projects have we supported. And we have, um, also stepped in and put a lot of resources into this whole advocacy. So, um, from just providing literature, handouts, um, how to guides, um, putting together online content, getting speakers to talk about various parts of FreeBSD, um, that's, I mean, those are multiple projects, but all falls under advocacy. And that's one of the biggest things that we've grown over the past few years. Um, we, my head's like, sort of this blank right now on like what, like software projects, but we do have one, one big project that we did fund was, uh, what's called the Linux, Linuxulator. And, um, and basically what allows you to do is on FreeBSD, you can run Linux binaries that, um, so, and those will run on FreeBSD. Um, other things coming out of the project, just the open ZFS or ZFS support, and we have funded projects there. That's been big. Um, Jails was really the first containers that you hear about Docker, but Jails were the first containers that, um, that was developed on FreeBSD. That wasn't something that we did, but really, um, you know, one of the significant, um, you know, features, um, way back when, early 2000s.

How, um, how are, uh, how do people, uh, get their projects funded? What's the process?

So there's a couple things, ways, uh, we do have a, a CFP or we have, uh, actually it's a project proposal application. And so we have information on our website on how to submit a proposal. So say you have an interest in implementing something and, um, but you need funding. So usually the case is this person, maybe they have to take time off of work to do this. And, uh, so they actually, so they write up the proposal, like what is it that they want to do? What are the outcomes and what's the timeframe? And then what's the cost? And then they submit that to us. And then what we do is, uh, we review it internally and then sometimes we'll actually, uh, send it to developers to get their input on, um, is this a project that would help FreeBSD? Because we're always looking at funding projects that really help further FreeBSD in various ways. And, uh, you know, it could be fixing a problem or it could be implementing a new feature and really just keeping it, uh, secure, stable, and, and innovative. So, so that's one way that we do it. Um, and then the other is that by working with companies and understanding, uh, their uses and their needs, as well as understanding market trends and just what's happening out there, then we also have internal roadmap. And, um, and so we look at how do we fund that work? And so, and we have software developers on our own staff and, um, and so we fund them to work in various areas. And we may hire someone to do specific work or we may just contract people too.

Do, um, the companies, the companies that you're doing some of that work with, do they also fund the projects as well for you?

Most, most of the funding is, so most of our funding does come from companies. And, um, and so it's, um, it's almost a hundred percent, uh, towards our general funds. So rarely do we take earmark funding, but we do do that. So if we have a project, so if a company wants something and we feel it's beneficial to FreeBSD in general, then, uh, if we have the resources, we'll do that work. And, uh, but most of the time companies will give to us because they know that, uh, the money that they're giving to us is helping, um, in these areas I talked about. So we have people on the security team, so it's helping with that. Uh, we have people on staff who will just step in and fix bugs right away, uh, whether they're our bugs or hardware bugs and, uh, just really having that, the resources available to get on top of things quickly. And so, um, so knowing that the money is going towards that, I mean, we, we try to be as transparent as possible with where our money is going. And, uh, we post more high level, um, state, you know, financial statements on our website, but we do try to be, um, open about how we're spending our money. And so, so anyway, that's, that's why that they'll give us money. We also get money from other companies that they might not use FreeBSD, but you know, or they know that they're benefiting by supporting us because it helps the open source ecosystem. And, um, and also there's components within FreeBSD that are used, um, by other companies in their products or just, um, just used in however way that they're using software operating systems.

Are most companies pretty open about, you know, saying that they use FreeBSD?

Um, some are, and I, no one is trying to be secretive about using it. It's It's just that that's not what's important to their product. So you wouldn't see, you wouldn't see Sony selling their PlayStation, you know, saying, oh, it runs on FreeBSD because it's the PlayStation that they're selling. That's, that's, what's important using FreeBSD is getting them what they need in order to create that, you know, that fabulous product that everyone wants. Um, then there's the other companies like Netflix is really good. They're a big advocate of FreeBSD and they, they've actually given talks about the high transfer rates that they achieve on the internet. And, uh, which is great. I mean, cause it helps FreeBSD, uh, we love to see it and we really appreciate it when, uh, when companies are really open about that and, um, and actually give talks or write articles about it.

Talk a bit about just the open source community in general. Um, do you, just the open source community in general. Um, do you, do you notice any trends or, or personality features about people that are in that community? Um, personality in that community? people that are Um, I mean, I think you could say that in just tech in general, um, you know, and, and

so I've been around a lot of different types of technical, technical people. Um, open source is, is interesting cause people are of technical, technical people. Um, open source is, is interesting cause people are doing open source. Most of them are doing those because they're passionate about it. So they're not it. So they're not getting paid to work on it. So, um, so like any type of organization that uses volunteers, whether it's, you know, like the humane society, if you love animals, um, they're there because they're passionate about it. so you it. And so you see that. And so, and that's exciting. And to see people giving their time, their free time, which is pretty valuable. Um, it, it speaks a lot to it. And so, uh, I do see that a lot in our community. I see us as a pretty diverse, uh, but friendly community. And when I say diverse, I really mean in, um, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the like culture and backgrounds of people, um, experiences and cause you'll have people who they want to get involved in open source and they feel like, well, I'm not qualified. I'm not technical or I don't write code, but they want to be involved. And they think that they're lesser because of that. And I know in our project, um, like documentation is viewed so highly that if you come in and you write documentation, you're viewed highly. You're not any lesser because you're not writing code. And we have people who create videos on previous D cause they love it, but they, they can't write code or, you know, that's not their strength. And, um, and I love seeing these and, I mean, we could share these videos that they create. And, um, and so there's, there's just so many different ways that you contribute. And, and that's in general open source, but, um, but I do see this in previous D a lot more as far as being more equal. And, um, but also having, um, some of these original, um, Berkeley people still in our community. And when you go to our conferences that they're available to talk to, and they love telling stories and they help, um, bring up these new, like, you know, younger, usually it's like it's like younger people. Uh, Uh, and, uh, and that's always exciting to see. And then when we do have these conferences, there's so much that happens there. And, uh, and I, the biggest thing is you always have presentations, which are great. And that's usually why you go, but you have hallway tracks and, or social events and you have, oh, and we'll always have a hacker lounge too. And so you have this opportunity to work together and come up with new ideas, or maybe someone has an idea and now they're sharing that idea. And now you have other people who are interested in working on this. And so everyone always leaves these conferences pretty much exhausted, but really excited. So, uh, so those are extremely important.

Talk about the international aspect of it as well.

The, yeah, it's, I mean, it's, it's a U S focus because like the foundation, we're a U we're a U S corporation, but, and I don't know, I can't remember what the breakout is of number of like U S contributors to outside the U S, but you have people from all over the world and, um, you over the world and, um, you know, we have lots of people in Europe and, uh, people in, uh, Ukraine, uh, Ukraine, uh, Asia, uh, South America who are contributing to the project. And, um, and so you have, so you have different cultures, uh, and, and it's interesting. Um, you know, it's, it's interesting. I think it's really important for us to figure out how to work well together. And one thing that I learned when I went to my first European conference was, um, I'm trying to remember what country we were in Malta, maybe. And we had this guy who, he organized the European conference and he asked me what I thought. And I said, and I told him, I go, I'm just exhausted because everyone has accents and it's so hard to understand. And he goes, but just think most of these people are native English speakers and how hard it is for them. And after he said that, I was like, yeah, I mean, what am I tired about? Like I'm, they're speaking my language to me. I don't have to deal with it being my second language. And so, um, so those are, that was a real important lesson to me. And, um, and so, but it's, but I've, I learned from our community and I, and I just find it so interesting, especially when we have this opportunity to go, we go to a different country in Europe every year for a conference and learning about, um, you know, their culture and, um, and meeting local people there. And that's, uh, that's been really educational. So, I mean, so we've gone to like Malta, Bulgaria, uh, Romania, uh, Norway, Sweden, Germany, France, um, you know, England, uh, Japan, Taiwan, we'll be in Taiwan next year. Uh, and so all these opportunities to meet people from around the world. And once, and also once we went and started doing these virtual conferences because of COVID, um, people who normally couldn't travel, it finally gave them the opportunity to, to attend some of these conferences, which was really nice.

That's terrific. Did, um, how did COVID impact, uh, your work?

So, um, so most of us were already working from home and, um, and so the impacts were, uh, uh, with our interns who are working in our office in Kitchener, Ontario. And, uh, so we have a, uh, intern or, um, there's a co-op program through the University of University of Waterloo that we participate in, which has been great. And, um, I think we had three interns and so they're all college students and they were working in our office there. So we there. So we have their computer setups there and they, and not all of them were from the Kitchener area either. And so we had to figure out how we can set them up to work from home, get them home and, um, and help them navigate working online and having to get their, like their supervision or mentoring online. So, um, so that, so that took an effort to figure out after that, after once we had finished that term and had another term, we were set up then, um, on how to do that. And And so we're pretty much set up now to do that. And then really the other thing was, was travel. And what do we do about travel? Because we had been traveling, uh, to, like I was saying, around the world, attending different conferences, giving workshops, things like that. So, so what do we do? And, um, and what are our responsibilities as a corporation? So, so really understanding that as well as like what were the government mandates and all that kind of stuff, understanding that understanding to our investments and what could happen because we, we try to keep enough money to pay salaries for one to two years. And, um, you know, and the stock market dropped, you know, those first few days. And so, um, so it really made me spend a lot of time understanding and figuring out putting together some plans, talking to people. And also I was talking to people from other companies, bigger companies, like, are you traveling? Are you going to go to this conference that's still happening to give a talk? And, and so, um, so most of the people would say, no, our, you know, companies have travel restrictions now. And so, so then it was like, we could have travel restrictions too. And so, so we did do that. And also, um, making sure employees felt that, um, they didn't have to travel, that we were making sure protections were in place too. And even now, um, that in person conferences are happening again, um, not everyone is comfortable traveling yet. And I know I've been traveling, but also I'm very careful right now about getting exposed. And so I'm one of those who still wears a mask, but, but that's my decision. And, um, if someone on my team is not comfortable traveling or being in a big conference setting, then that's okay. So, so, um, uh, so we make sure that, um, you know, that we're, uh, there's, I don't think there's anything that we have to do that we have to actually go and be physical at, we've done everything online, which is great.

That's really cool. Um, you had mentioned, you'd mentioned, um, that the originators of FreeBSD are still very involved in, in the foundation. Can Can you talk about some of those people?

Yes. And hopefully you'll get their stories too. Um, cause there's some great stories there. Kirk McKusick, um, he's, he came from Berkeley. He was a PhD student when, I always want to say playing around with, uh, the Berkeley Annex, but really, I mean, it was, uh, it was a product that companies were using in their, um, doing research with it. And so, um, so he's one of the original people on, um, on BSD, Berkeley Annex, as well as in FreeBSD. But when you talk to him, he'll say, well, I wasn't one of the first, uh, people on FreeBSD because there was actually a lawsuit that was happening at the time and against Berkeley Annex. And, um, and so for like two years, I think, um, the developers from Berkeley, the students mostly, um, had to, um, had to focus on that. And, uh, so FreeBSD had branched out and from then there was FreeBSD and NetBSD at the beginning. And, um, so some of those folks, uh, Jordan Hubbard, Rodney Grimes, some other folks that, um, hopefully we'll get some, um, recordings from them to hear their stories too. Um, but they were part of FreeBSD when it first, um, you know, started out in 1993, which we're celebrating the 30th anniversary of this year. And And when did you join the foundation? So I joined in 2005.

And so, so since then, like what, what, um, what kind of changes have you seen just in the community and, and, you know, there's just, I mean, um, it's 18 years. So what, what, what's changed? I know it's I know it's a long time.

Um, I've seen it grow. Um, yeah, I've seen more people join. I've seen more younger people join too, which has been really cool. And that's something that we're really trying to increase too. So we're learning from them too, which is great. Like why, why would you be interested in, uh, contributing to FreeBSD or learning about FreeBSD? The other things from the foundation perspective is, uh, we're just funding so much more work. We're bringing in a lot more money. And like I said earlier on, when I first joined the foundation, I was part-time. And so until I start bringing in the funds, I stayed part-time, which I was fine with at the time. And so as we brought in more money, then we were able to hire more people. So, uh, we brought in, um, Ed Maust who now oversees all of our development work, but he, at the time, uh, he was doing, he was, uh, doing software development work himself for us. We hired a marketing director and that's when we started providing all that advocacy material and the online content and stuff like that. And then since, since then, um, we've hired more software developers. We've built our marketing. Um, and also we're identifying other, um, positions that would really help the project. And I just hired, uh, someone who's, who just stepped in as our director of partnership and research. And, uh, and that's really gonna help, um, like nurture and build these relationships that we have with companies. And, um, as well as helping get more companies, uh, to learn about previous D and why they should adopt it. And so have someone who could full-time work on that because that was my job before. And, and it's just hard to do, to run the organization and to, um, you know, be able to to follow up on, on that type of stuff. And the research component of that is really, um, part of it is policy to where, what should we get we get involved with? There's There's a lot of cybersecurity stuff going on now. Um, you know, making sure, um, our voices or our voice is included in some of the government, uh, discussions. And, um, also what are the trends that are happening out there and what should we be involved with? And, um, as well as looking at like what research is happening with freeBSD, there's a a lot of security work that's happening with freeBSD. And so not only spending the time doing that, but, um, publicizing that. And, uh, so users know and universities know and corporations know that freeBSD is a really good solution for like security. And, um, well with Earth Day tomorrow, um, yeah, low power consumption being more environmentally friendly. And, uh, so things like that. So, so we're looking at growing the team in ways like that, that helps freeBSD overall. So that's so how we've grown. So we have, I don't know, eight, nine employees now. Um, and then as far as the growth of the project, just, um, more companies using freeBSD or companies coming out of there would work too that have been using freeBSD that we didn't know about because it's not like we have this product and we're selling it. So we know all the users out there that are using it. It's the license allows anyone to use freeBSD and to make whatever changes that they want. And, um, so there's products out there that are using freeBSD that we have no idea. We would love to know, but they don't have to let us know. That's not their, that's not their priority. So, um, so anyway, so learning about those uses are interesting and really helpful.

What is your biggest challenge?

Um, I would say the biggest challenge that, well, a couple of things, uh, one is for the project, one's for us. So one would that, well, a couple project, one's for us. uh, one is for the So one would be getting the money that to do this work, to fund the work. Cause we, there's, there's so many things we know we can help with and we just don't have the resources to do it. know we can help with have the resources to do it. And, uh, we have these conversations all the time, like, oh, if we had someone who could step in to do this, that would be so beneficial. And, but we can't, can't do it cause we don't have the funding. So really is getting that funding and having the director of partnerships will, will really help that. Um, and then the other challenge is within the project that because it's a volunteer organization is getting people to do certain things. So, you know, if you're a volunteer and you're working on here on this project because you love it, you're passionate about it. But maybe there's like some boring task. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of boring tasks that have to be done. Yeah. Do you really want to spend your time on that? You want to do the exciting things. So, um, so a lot of times it's hard to find people to do more of the tactical type of things. And, um, and that's where actually we try to step in and help with, and, um, you know, is, is to, you know, fill those holes where you can't get a volunteer, but, um, but going back to the funding, we can't always do that. So I'd say like, those are the two biggest challenge challenges.

What do you think your leadership, your leadership style is? Oh, mine.

Um, I haven't really thought about that. Um, I, I'm pretty down to earth person. So I'm not, I don't know, pushy would be the word. I try to listen to, um, I listen and watch the staff, you know, what are their needs? What am I seeing that maybe they need help with and, and ask questions. And, um, and I really try to make sure that I think it's really important to have a good life work balance. And, um, and so I make sure that we're as accommodating as we can be. And, and because we are remote and most people, everyone works from home, um, it is easier to do that. I've always loved working from home. So, I mean, I love to not having a commute, just that hour, what can you do that hour? Um, and do that hour? Um, and I love being able to just get up and start working at seven. So then I, like I was saying, so I can go for a run or whatever. And, And, um, so, so for me, it's really being available, listening, um, and asking questions of, you of, you know, what are your challenges? What do you like? your challenges? What do you like? You know, what, what are you doing that you really don't like? And, that you really don't like? And, um, and then trying to work with them on making sure people are doing what they're interested in. And, people are doing interested in. they're And, um, you know, cause they can't, we have a lot of jobs or tasks that we have to do that tasks that we have to do that maybe aren't the things that we love, just like what I was saying with the volunteers, but they have to be done. was saying with the volunteers, but they have to be done. So making sure there's a good balance there too. Have you had a good balance there too. Have you had any challenges in your career, um, being a woman in sort of a man dominated

field? Um, well, field? dominated Um, well, yeah, I have, um, I mean, even, you know, starting out in college, um, there

weren't that many women in, who are studying any, any of those disciplines, uh, computer science, engineering, any of those disciplines, uh, computer science, engineering, computer engineering, and math. Cause those were, and math. Cause those were, I think the areas that I touched on. Um, but I also that I touched on. Um, but I also found that because it was such a hard discipline that we really worked together to understand things that we had. Um, I mean, maybe you didn't have Google back then, but yeah, we had our own working group that spent a lot of time together. And so sometimes, so there might be six of us and really just teaching each other concepts if we didn't, if someone doesn't teaching each other concepts if we didn't, if someone doesn't understand it. So maybe I'd have another woman in there or maybe I'd be the only one and didn't really matter because we were all, we all felt like we're in the same boat. Yeah. Just trying to, to swim. we Yeah. Just trying all felt like we're Just trying to, to swim. Um, there's definitely companies, uh, where it was hard, um, and, uh, from being just and, uh, from being discriminated, and, uh, from being just and, uh, from being discriminated, discriminated against, um, to, you know, being in sales, being part of sales and being at social events, uh, you have to, I felt like I always had to to be, um, aware and, um, I feel like that in life, uh, you have to be aware of your surroundings and people around you anyway. So I don't think that that's any different. Um, but definitely have always felt that I had to work harder to do the same thing. And other people got recognition where, um, the standards were definitely lowered. And what I always found interesting was when people started complaining about having to have that diversity of making sure you have, yeah, bring more women. And I'll use that as an example of that. You have to lower standards for that. And it's like, I'm thinking, I think it's the opposite because I've, I've seen, um, you know, in many of, um, you know, my jobs that people were recognized and praised for not doing a very good job because there was a lot of competition. So I think having more women, um, does bring in more competition and it's just really, how do we get more women first interested in like STEM fields? And then the second would be staying. So, cause I, I left and, um, and cause it, it, it, it's hard. It's not really giving up. It's like, you look at your life and you look at what do I want to do? What do I want to deal with? And, um, and so maybe you take a step back for a little bit. I got back into tech and, um, and yeah, things still happen, but, um, but I'm seeing being back in tech and going to like these women and competing conferences from, uh, like Grace Hopper to, we have, um, ECM puts on these celebrations of women competing all around the world. And first seeing these students, seeing the speakers, it's, uh, so inspirational that there's a lot of women in STEM and, um, but I know in operating systems, it is hard. And, um, and I, and I don't know why. And, um, and so trying to figure that out and how to make it, um, you know, attract more people, um, is, uh, yeah, it's one of the things that we're trying to work on.

What do you think has been your, um, greatest achievement so far in the field?

Well, so in the field or with the foundation? Um, Um, first let's go first in the field and then, and then the foundation.

I love that.

Um, so I would say, um, that for me, it's been telling my story to girls and women at these type of women competing conferences. Um, I remember being at, uh, there's a conference in Europe called Women Courage and it's put on by ACM. It's their, uh, it's their European women, celebration of women in computing conference. And I remember I was staffing a table and, and so I was there to promote FreeBSD and trying to encourage people to consider contributing or using FreeBSD. And I had so many women students come up to me and want to just talk to me about my background and my history, sort of like what we're doing here. And because a lot of times when you go to these conferences, you have, um, you don't have actual like female, um, engineers there. You'll have representatives of the company and usually they're recruiters or marketing, which is fine. Um, and so, but they don't, they can't tell those types of stories. And so, uh, so, so much fun, um, you know, being asked these questions and then also just how excited they were about, um, you know, the potential and the opportunity. And, and so really that's what I feel like is an achievement. And, um, and it's funny because usually when you think of an achievement, you think of something that you developed and, you know, and I developed disk drives. I want to say that they were great and, um, implemented new features and stuff like that. But really what stands out to me is that being a role model or someone who's available to talk about that. Yeah, of course you can do it. And cause I was never told that I couldn't do it. And, um, and so it's really finding, you know, what are you interested in? And if you're, and you could be in tech and still, it doesn't have to be like you're on a computer and your mom's face just programming all day. It's, it can be so creative and, um, and you can be outgoing. And I mean, there's so many characteristics that aren't part of the stereotypical software person that, and so, so if we can model that and, um, and show more people who are like that, um, I think it'll really gain more interest of, of girls and women in the field.

Well, that's a great answer, but, uh, also what about your achievement at, uh, Pre-BSD Foundation? Um, Um, so to me, I guess it would be growing the company because like I said, I was the

first employee, so we were hardly anything at the time. And, um, at the time. And, um, and now we're this, uh, team of passionate people about Pre-BSD who can go to companies and talk to them who go around the world giving talks of Pre-BSD. A lot of times it's me and, um, and I'm learning about Pre-BSD and, um, and so what we've been able to contribute back to the project. And by doing that into the world, because when you look at Pre-BSD as this product, um, I mean, companies use it and they benefit from it, but it's this free operating system that anyone around the world can use. And the hardware that it runs on can be really cheap. So you can go into, you know, underdeveloped countries. And I mean, we can't do this because we don't have the resources yet, but other people could do it. could do it. And so you can, um, teach people skills that will give them jobs and, um, you know, and make them marketable. And so, so really as, as this free product, there's so much potential for it. That's That's fantastic.

Um, why do you think it's important to, to, to be documenting the history of, of the field?

Well, I mean, the history of everything, it's important. If it's not documented, then you can change it. So, right. I mean, we're, we're, I won't go into it, but I mean, right. I I mean, we change history and, um, and it's interesting. Um, I mean, it's an interesting question because when I give my talks on Pre-BSD, I do go over the history because I think that's really important. But you can look at it as like, well, that's before who cares about that? You know, we want to know what, you know, what's important now or why it's so great now. But to me, it always goes back to the foundation of anything. So, you know, it can be multiplication. So understanding instead of memorizing tables, understanding that, you know, yeah. So it's very Montessori, you know, if you actually touch it and add it, you could see it and feel it. That's foundation and everything builds off of that. And so understanding the history, what really happened and why, and, you know, and the reasons can can be different for different people. Right. And so, um, so having the stories available for others, uh, is just really important. And yeah, hopefully people find it interesting. And I know that my story it's, you know, at the time I never really thought like, oh, you know, there's two women in all my engineering classes. Like I'm at the forefront of this. I never thought of that. I thought, oh, here's a skill I can get and I can have job and financial security and a good future. And so I really looked at it like that. And And it was an opportunity and I was able, I wasn't limited, like, you know, when you think of people like Maria Montessori who wanted, she wanted to be an engineer and she could. They wouldn't allow women to be engineers. And I guess that was Italy. She became a medical doctor and she was able to do that. And then what she did was amazing with her, you know, way, her way of teaching and developing minds is so amazing and how they tried to limit her and she still figured out a way to do it. So actually probably because she became a doctor was because of that, because she worked with with children and she learned how the brain worked. If she was an engineer, she probably would not have made that contribution. And I had never thought of that before. It's really interesting.

Yeah, but I think, too, with things moving so quickly in the field, it's good to take a moment and capture a moment in time as well, you know.

True. Yeah, yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. So one last question. And that is, if your great, great grandchild were to stumble on this recording 100 years from now, what would you want them to know? What What would you want to say to them?

If they stumble on this recording, so they're watching this recording, that I think I'd want them to know just that they can do anything that they want. And it doesn't mean it's easy. And usually you have to work hard towards it. But if you want it, then go for it. And don't let anyone stop you and tell you you can't do it. And just believe in yourself. But also try to find people to help you, too. And just try. And the other thing, too, is just we learn from our failures. I mean, you always hear that. But it's really true. And if you don't try something, you won't fail. And so you lose out on that learning opportunity. So when you do fail, it's pretty horrible at the time. But But you get past it. And once you get past it, you use that knowledge to either do better or be better or whatever it is. So So I think that's it. Just the fact that there's so many opportunities out there. And really, try to figure out what you enjoy and what's your passion. And try it. Because really, when you look at your lifetime, it's a long time. And you can change. So if you make a decision to do something. And maybe you realize maybe that's not what you want, that's OK. That you have time to try something else. And what you bring with you is you gain that experience and knowledge, too. So that's what I would say. And hopefully, I will have great grandchildren.

That's a great answer. So So is there anything you wanted to say that maybe we've skipped over that you feel is important that you'd like to get on the record?

It's funny. Because to me, when I look back in my career, I don't see anything significant that I feel like I accomplished. But I also looked at when I was very career driven when I started out. And when I decided to have children, it really changed my perspective. And I think that happens to most people. And you realize what's important. And I think defining that or understanding that is what should drive you. And then you work around it. And if you're still really, I mean, I've always wanted to continue working and working hard and working in an area that I was interested in. But also realizing, too, that there's other things that are also as or more important. And so I feel really good about what I've done. And this isn't the end of my life. And so I see so much more that I could do, which is exciting, I think. I still have ideas going around my head of things that I would like to do. And I'm happy that I'm healthy and that I feel like I'll be able to do them. And I really appreciate the time that you gave me. And I look forward to hearing other stories. And that's what's exciting, too, about this project is going back, is being able to watch some of these other stories and learning from these people, too.

Well, thank you so, so much for sharing your story with us. Oh, us. Oh, you're welcome.

It has been really fun spending time just thinking back. I'm I'm like, what did I do? Why did I even choose going to TAC? Because Because it was so long ago, right? It It certainly seemed like the right move.

What's that? I said, it certainly seemed like the right move, though. When you really look back. Yeah, yeah.

I never regret not taking this path. So and I think that's important, too. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I'm going to...